Throughout the Great Gatsby by F. Scott Fitzgerald, Gatsby tries to cover up his flaws and hide his past. Tom, on the other hand, is more open about his flaws and blemishes. While Gatsby’s need to display perfection causes him to elevate himself above others, Tom does not care about his reputation and outward appearance and is able to form closer bonds and better relationships with the other characters than Gatsby.
Gatsby is overly focused on protecting his image, and he raises himself above his friends, which causes him to struggle to form relationships with others. He tries to present himself as sophisticated and urbane by delicately refining his behavior and speech when in front of others. When Nick encounters Gatsby at the party, he commented, “[His] elaborate formality of speech just missed being absurd. Some time before he introduced himself I’d got a strong impression that he was picking his words with care” (48). He puts much effort into displaying these qualities to Nick, as well as others. By doing so, he is effectively painting an ideal picture of himself, but he is also alienating his friends. Nick is unable to truly connect with Gatsby because Gatsby is keeping walls between them. Trying to present a perfect version of himself also makes Gatsby lose his closest friends. After his death, save for his dad and Nick, nobody showed up at Gatsby’s funeral. Nick even noticed at the funeral how, “Nobody came” (174). Even though he meets countless people over the course of his parties and experiences, his need to appear perfect leaves him with no one to truly care for him. By elevating himself above everyone else, he cannot form personal relationships. Instead, he is looked upon as a role model by the others, but never as a friend or peer.
Unlike Gatsby, Tom doesn’t care about his outward appearance and doesn’t try to raise himself above the other characters, so he has an easier time forming relationships with them. Tom is seen as a rough, masculine figure, but he does not try to cover up his flaws like the others. Instead of hiding his blemishes like Gatsby, he accepts them, and doing so, can get closer to the others. Tom, while driving to the city, tells Nick, “You think I’m pretty dumb, don't you?… Perhaps I am, but I have a—almost a second sight, sometimes, that tells me what to do. (121)” Tom openly admits his flaws to Nick, which places him on a level equal to Nick. By not attempting to be perfect and above the others, he opens himself to be able to connect with others. Tom also experiences a deeper connection with George Wilson. Even though their relationship may not be perfect, Tom connects with George on a personal level, which is much more than Gatsby could achieve. Instead of elevating himself by looking perfect, he reduces himself to the same level as George, so he can have a more personal relationship. By not hiding his flaws and elevating his image, he can form more personal connections with the others.
Gatsby, while he meets many people over the course of his life, is unable to make any friends or personal connections because he tries to seem ideal and raises himself above everyone else. On the other hand, Tom does not care about hiding his flaws, so he does not have trouble having relations with others. In order to make friends, one must not raise one’s status above everyone else, because doing so can alienate them and cause them to feel inferior. A full and complete life may not entail being perfect, but being imperfect and forming strong, robust relationships with others. 